
1. INTRODUCTION
Boundary delimitation is among the most technically and legally complex processes within electoral management (Handley and Grofman 2008). Despite its significance for democratic representation, the study of rule making, adjudication, and application in redistricting remains largely understudied across third-wave democracies. In this article we use Mexico’s redistricting experience to address the “delegation dilemma” and its link with the general problem of balancing bureaucratic control and the inclusion of political parties within electoral management. 

Since the 1990s, redistricting  in Mexico has been carried out by a formally independent bureaucracy with a “non-partisan” executive board responsible for managing elections. Political parties, however, were included at multiple administrative levels of the bureaucracy since the board's inception and have played a central role for the credibility of elections, especially during the country's transition to democracy (Woldenberg 2012, Estévez et al., 2008, Mozaffar and Schedler 2002). 

This institutional setup exemplifies the underlying tension some countries face when parties are formally embedded in electoral management as a “fire alarm” mechanism in order to guarantee rule compliance and the neutral implementation of policy procedures (McCubbins and Schwartz 1984). Furthermore, a better understanding of the interaction between political parties and the purportedly independent electoral bureaucracy at different administrative levels complements the ongoing debate in the electoral governance literature focusing on delegation and electoral independence (Mozaffar and Schedler 2002: 16). 

This debate has traditionally focused on a threefold classification of formally independent electoral management bodies (EMBs) – partisan, mixed, and independent – based solely on the composition of the executive board or the institutional mechanisms used to appoint its members (Molina and Hernandez 1999, Hartlyn et al., 2008, Rosas 2010, and Lara Otaola 2018). It overlooks, however, the different ways in which political parties can be embedded within de jure independent electoral bureaucracies, their role as “watchdogs” contributing to electoral integrity, or the degree to which they act as “distrustful principals” constraining the role of the “agent,” in this case the bureaucracy, during the implementation of specific policy procedures. 

We argue that the delegation chain in democratic representation has three links: i) from citizens and interest groups to legislative parties; ii) from legislative parties to administrative agencies responsible for managing elections; and iii) from an administrative agency to experts (e.g., a technical committee). When parties are invited to observe and engage in the process, all information and decision-making needs to be both transparent and consistent in order for redistricting -- and, thus, the electoral system -- to be truly accountable and to render a more democratic process. 

Here, we analyze bureaucratic-partisan behavior that has been operating behind closed doors within a formally independent bureaucracy. The discrepancy between a purportedly transparent automated process and this closed partisan bargaining interaction raises a broad set of questions related to transparency (e.g., Are Mexico’s redistricting rules complete, exhaustive, and unambiguous?) and consistency (e.g., Were the 2013 and 2017 redistricting processes compliant with the law? Have discretionary rules been applied consistently within and across processes? Are the observed outputs consistent with how the process was officially portrayed?). 

In sum, outsiders in the past have been unable to assess the degree of political manipulation during Mexico’s redistricting. We examine the extent to which technocrats supplanted politicians by analyzing how the electoral bureaucracy interacted with political parties within the independent board in the 2013 and 2017 redistricting processes (Lujambio and Vives 2008, Trelles 2017). We utilize a novel dataset comprising the entire set of plans proposed by political parties that has remained unavailable outside the Mexican bureaucracy. Our analysis offers a unique insight into the internal workings of Mexico´s independent electoral commission and provides guidance for narrowing the transparency, consistency, and accountability gaps in redistricting. 
