We investigate the key role of transparency in the political control of administrative agencies, with application to redistricting in Mexico. In this area, democratic government can be represented as a delegation chain with three links: 1) from citizens and interest groups to legislative parties; 2) from legislative parties to administrative agencies (in Mexico, the INE); and 3) from an administrative agency to experts (in our case, mapmakers). We contend that...


FIRE-ALARM OVERSIGHT: Analogous to the use of real fire alarms, fire-alarm oversight is [decentralized] and involves less active and direct intervention: instead of examining a sample of [district boundaries], looking for violations of [principals'] goals, Congress establishes a system of rules, procedures, and [methods] that enable citizens and interest groups to examine the [redistricting process] ([mostly] in prospect), to charge [expert mapmakers] with violating principals' goals, and to seek remedies from agencies, courts, and Congress itself. Some of these rules, procedures, and [methods] afford citizens and interest groups access to information and to [boundary delimitation] decision-making processes. Others give them standing to challenge [maps] before agencies and courts, or help them bring alleged violations to congressmen's attention. Still others facilitate collective action by comparatively disorganized interest groups. Congress' role consists in creating and perfecting this decentralized system and, occasionally, intervening in response to complaints. Instead of sniffing for fires, Congress places fire-alarm boxes on street corners, builds neighborhood fire houses, and sometimes dispatches it own hook-and-ladder in response to an alarm. 





---------------

In electoral management, the availability of policy-relevant data is crucial to ensure the neutrality of bureaucratic decision-making.  In this section we explain our expectations and articulate three broad research questions based on these three general principles. Based on the observable outcomes and rules governing the process, we empirically evaluate these dimensions within the context of the Mexican redistricting process.
In a system that is fully transparent, consistent, and accountable, the following would hold:



1) Rules are unambiguous, and consistent with each other. That is, rules do not contradict each other, and the rationale for subordinate rules is consistent with the goals of higher order rules. 
2) All rules of the process are publicly available (before, during, and after the process), including: constitutional rules, statutory code, regulations, administrative agreements. 
3) All evidence relevant to the operation of the process is publicly available, including:  inputs (e.g. data), actions (e.g. proposals and evaluations), and outputs (e.g. winning plans).
4) Rules and evidence are consistent. No action should be forbidden by a rule; and the overall pattern of outcomes should be broadly consistent with the declared goals. 

These properties are essential for ensuring the quality of electoral management because in order for vertical and horizontal accountability to take place, a full disclosure of information is required.





Only then, it can be determined if redistricting met the institutional goals of true transparency and impartiality, which are supposed to be part of INE’s core principles.  

In the remainder of this section we evaluate points 1 and 2, and 3, while section 4 focuses on the final question. 


Transparency and consistency are necessary condition of accountability



----

Here are a couple of comments in case I can't connectto tomorrow's meeting.

(1) It seems to me that the paper is assessing two, not three properties of redistricting: transparency and consistency (section 3.1). A process that has both properties is also accountable. 

Section 3.1 could be rewritten thus:

It is well established that transparency and consistency are critical for decision-making in general, and electoral integrity in particular, to be accountable (Fung 2007; Hollyer et al., 2011, Norris and Nai 2017). The principles are these:

Transparency: All steps of the process are publicly available, before, during, and after the decision is made. This includes preparation, planning, discussions, and execution. Rules must be universally available, including relevant constitutional articles, statutory codes, regulations, administrative agreements, and even informal practices. So must be all evidence relevant to the operation of the process, including inputs (e.g. data), actions (e.g. proposals and evaluations), and outputs (e.g. winning plans). 

Consistency: Decision-making rules are unambiguous, and consistent with each other. That is, rules do not contradict one another, and the rationale for subordinate rules is consistent with the goals of higher-order rules. Rules and evidence are consistent. No action should be forbidden by a rule; and the overall pattern of outcomes should be broadly consistent with the declared goals. 

A process that is simultaneously transparent and consistent is also accountable. For example, a citizen, interest group, or judge who wants to assess the system, compare outcomes, evaluate whether or not goals were met, or if the decision was politically neutral, would need access to a wide variety of information in accessible formats (Trelles et al., 2016).


(2) And, following Mike's suggestion, the paper connects to the political control of the bureacracy. Fire-alarm oversight (cf. McCubbins and Schwartz 1984) sets forth means for external actors to oversee administrative agencies. We could claim that fire-alarm oversight necessitates transparency and consistency---and even define accountability in the narrower sense of fire-alarm oversight. I've adapted the following quote from McSchwartz to fit redistricting. It covers a lot of what we seem to be looking for in boundary delimitation:

FIRE-ALARM OVERSIGHT Analogous to the use of real fire alarms, fire-alarm oversight is decentralized and involves less active and direct intervention: instead of examining a sample of district boundaries, looking for violations of principals' goals, Congress establishes a system of rules, procedures, and mechanisms that enable citizens and interest groups to examine the redistricting process (mostly in prospect), to charge expert mapmakers with violating principals' goals, and to seek remedies from agencies, courts, and Congress itself. Some of these rules, procedures, and mechanisms afford citizens and interest groups access to information and to boundary delimitation decision-making processes. Others give them standing to challenge maps before agencies and courts, or help them bring alleged violations to congressmen's attention. Still others facilitate collective action by comparatively disorganized interest groups. Congress' role consists in creating and perfecting this decentralized system and, occasionally, intervening in response to complaints. Instead of sniffing for fires, Congress places fire-alarm boxes on street corners, builds neighborhood fire houses, and sometimes dispatches it own hook-and-ladder in response to an alarm. (The final sentences can be further adapted to redistricting.) 

In light of this, the paper could open with a paragraph such as this:

We investigate the key role of transparency and consistency in the political control of administrative agencies, with application to redistricting in Mexico. In this area, democratic government can be represented as a delegation chain with three links: 1) from citizens and interest groups to legislative parties; 2) from legislative parties to administrative agencies (in Mexico, the INE); and 3) from an administrative agency to experts (in our case, mapmakers). We contend that transparency and consistency render redistricting more democratic by improving monitoring of mapmakers’ decisions, in prospect, by citizens, lawmakers, and election regulators. This, in turn, contributes to redress any distortions of original intent in links 1 and 2, not just in link 3...  

I look forward to our meeting tomorrow. -e
